Add governance model (#3153)
hyperspy/hyperspy: doc/governance.md

Core developers that have not contributed to the project (commits or GitHub comments)
in the past 12 months will be asked if they want to become emeritus core developers
and recant their commit rights until they become active again.
The list of core developers, active and emeritus, is public at the following page [TODO: setup the page].

## BDFL

The Project’s Benevolent dictator for life (BDFL) is Francisco de la Peña.
The BDFL has the authority to make all final decisions for The Project. In practice
the BDFL chooses to defer that authority to the consensus of the Steering Council
(see below). It is expected that the BDFL will only rarely assert his final authority.
Because rarely used, we refer to BDFL’s final authority as a “special” or “overriding” vote. When it does occur, the BDFL override typically happens in situations where there is a deadlock in the Steering Council (see below) or if the Steering Council asks the BDFL to make a decision on a specific matter.

## Steering Council

The Project will have a Steering Council that consists of Project Contributors
who have produced contributions that are substantial in quality and quantity,

> and sustained over at least one year. The overall role of the Council is to ensure,

Author: ```suggestion
who have produced contributions that are substantial in quality and quantity. The overall role of the Council is to ensure,
```

The Steering Council and its Members play a special role in certain situations.
In particular, the Council may:

- Make decisions about the overall scope, vision and direction of the project.
- Make decisions about strategic collaborations with other organizations or individuals.
- Make decisions when a regular community discussion does not produce consensus on
  an issue in a reasonable time frame.

The chair of the Steering Council is elected by the Steering Council and voted every year. The chair may delegate their authority on a particular decision or set of decisions to any other Council member at their discretion. The chair is responsible for ensuring that all Steering Council activities that require a vote are properly documented.

### Council membership

The Steering Council is currently fixed in size [to be defined] members. This number may increase in the future. The initial Steering Council (in alphabetical order) consists of [to be determined].
To become eligible for being a Steering Council Member an individual must be a
Project Contributor who has produced contributions that are substantial in quality

> and quantity, and sustained over at least one year. Potential Council Members are

Author: ```suggestion
Potential Council Members are
```
As mentioned by @jlaehne, this is repeated above.

nominated by existing Council members and voted upon by the existing Council.

When considering potential Members, the Council will look at candidates with a
comprehensive view of their contributions. This will include but is not limited
to code, code review, infrastructure work, chat participation, community
help/building, education and outreach, contributions to other projects of the HyperSpy ecosystem, design work, etc. We are deliberately
not setting arbitrary quantitative metrics (like “100 commits in this repo”) to
avoid encouraging behavior that plays to the metrics rather than the project’s
overall well-being. We want to encourage a diverse array of backgrounds, viewpoints
and talents in our team, which is why we explicitly do not define code as the
sole metric on which council membership will be evaluated.

If a Council member becomes inactive in the project for a period of one year,
they will be considered for removal from the Council. Before removal, the inactive

> Member will be approached by the BDFL to see if they plan

Author: ```suggestion
Member will be approached by the chair to see if they plan
```

among other possibilities. Any community member can become a contributor, and
all are encouraged to do so. By contributing to the project, community members
can directly help to shape its future.

Contributors are encouraged to read the [contributing guide](https://github.com/hyperspy/hyperspy/blob/RELEASE_next_minor/.github/CONTRIBUTING.md).

## Core developers

Core developers are trusted community members that have demonstrated continued
commitment to the project through ongoing contributions. They
have shown they can be trusted to maintain HyperSpy with care. Becoming a
core developer allows contributors to merge approved pull requests, and thereby more easily carry on with their project related
activities. Core developers appear as organization members on the HyperSpy
[GitHub organization](https://github.com/orgs/hyperspy/people) and are on our
[@hyperspy/developers](https://github.com/orgs/hyperspy/teams/developers) GitHub
team. Core developers are expected to review code contributions while adhering to the
[core developer guide](CORE_DEV_GUIDE.md). New core developers can be nominated
by any existing core developer, and for details on that process see our core

> developer guide.

Author: ```suggestion
activities. New core developers can be nominated by any existing core developer.
```
There is currently no "core developer guide" and the page https://github.com/orgs/hyperspy/teams/developers is only visible to members of the HyperSpy organisation, so not public and not suitable here... The list of core developers is mentioned below.

Core developers that have not contributed to the project (commits or GitHub comments)
in the past 12 months will be asked if they want to become emeritus core developers
and recant their commit rights until they become active again.

> The list of core developers, active and emeritus, is public.

Author: ```suggestion
The list of core developers, active and emeritus, is public at the following page [TODO: setup the page].
```

## Steering Council

The Project will have a Steering Council that consists of Project Contributors
who have produced contributions that are substantial in quality and quantity,
and sustained over at least one year. The overall role of the Council is to ensure,
with input from the Community, the long-term well-being of the project, both technically and as a community.

During the everyday project activities, council members participate in all
discussions, code review and other project activities as peers with all other
Contributors and the Community. In these everyday activities, Council Members do
not have any special power or privilege through their membership on the Council.

The Steering Council and its Members play a special role in certain situations.
In particular, the Council may:

- Make decisions about the overall scope, vision and direction of the project.
- Make decisions about strategic collaborations with other organizations or individuals.
- Make decisions about specific technical issues, features, bugs and pull requests.

>   They are the primary mechanism of guiding the code review process and merging pull requests.

Author: ```suggestion
```

Removed as suggested by @francisco-dlp elsewhere: this is not really the role of the SC.

objections, the decision is escalated to the SC, which will itself use
consensus seeking to come to a resolution. In the unlikely event that there is
still a deadlock, the proposal will move forward if it has the support of a
simple majority of the SC.

Decisions (in addition to adding core developers and SC membership as above)
are made according to the following rules:

- **Minor documentation changes**, such as typo fixes, or addition / correction of a
  sentence, require approval by a core developer *and* no disagreement or requested
  changes by a core developer on the issue or pull request page (lazy
  consensus). Core developers are expected to give “reasonable time” to others
  to give their opinion on the pull request if they’re not confident others
  would agree.

- **Code changes and major documentation changes** require agreement by *one*
  core developer *and* no disagreement or requested changes by a core developer
  on the issue or pull-request page (lazy consensus). For all changes of this type,
  core developers are expected to give “reasonable time” after approval and before
  merging for others to weigh in on the pull request in its final state.

> - **Changes to the API principles** require a dedicated issue on our

Author: ```suggestion
- **Changes to the public API** require a dedicated issue on our
```

  [issue tracker](https://github.com/hyperspy/hyperspy/issues) and follow the
  decision-making process outlined above.

- **Changes to this governance model or our mission, vision, and values**
  require a dedicated issue on our [issue tracker](https://github.com/hyperspy/hyperspy/issues)
  and follow the decision-making process outlined above,
  *unless* there is unanimous agreement from core developers on the change in

>   which case it can move forward faster.

Author: ```suggestion
- **Suggestion for changes to this governance model or our mission and principles** are welcome and require a dedicated issue on our [issue tracker](https://github.com/hyperspy/hyperspy/issues). Changes to this governance requires approval of the Steering Council.
```

If an objection is raised on a lazy consensus, the proposer can appeal to the
community and core developers and the change can be approved or rejected by
escalating to the SC.

# Acknowledgements

> This document is adapted from the [Jupyter Project governance](https://jupyter.org/governance/governance.html).

Author: ```suggestion
This document has been inspired by the [scikit-image governance](https://scikit-image.org/docs/stable/skips/1-governance.html).
```

elements of our community interact. This document establishes a decision-making
structure that takes into account feedback from all members of the community
and strives to find consensus, while avoiding any deadlocks.

This is a meritocratic, consensus-based community project. Anyone with an interest
in the project can join the community, contribute to the project design, and
participate in the decision making process. This document describes how that
participation takes place and how to set about earning merit within the project community.

The foundations of Project governance are:

- Openness & Transparency
- Active Contribution
- Institutional Neutrality

# Historical Considerations

Project leadership was initially provided by its main creator, Francisco de la Peña.
Additional leadership has also been provided by a subset of Contributors, called
core developers, whose significant or consistent contributions have been recognized
by their receiving “commit rights” to the Project repositories. While this approach
has served us well, as the Project grows, we see a need for a more formal
governance model. Moving forward, the Project leadership will consist of a

> core developers team, Steering Council and a BDFL. We view this governance model as the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
core developers team, ancilliary project core developers, a Steering Council and a BDFL. We view this governance model as the
```

Reviewer 2: See my comment below concerning the "ancilliary project core developers" category.

- discussing the design of HyperSpy in existing
  [issues](https://github.com/hyperspy/hyperspy/issues) and
  [pull requests](https://github.com/hyperspy/hyperspy/pulls);
- reviewing [open pull requests](https://github.com/hyperspy/hyperspy/pulls)

among other possibilities. Any community member can become a contributor, and
all are encouraged to do so. By contributing to the project, community members
can directly help to shape its future.

Contributors are encouraged to read the [contributing guide](https://github.com/hyperspy/hyperspy/blob/RELEASE_next_minor/.github/CONTRIBUTING.md).

## Core developers

Core developers are trusted community members that have demonstrated continued
commitment to the project through ongoing contributions. They
have shown they can be trusted to maintain HyperSpy with care. Becoming a
core developer allows contributors to merge approved pull requests, and thereby more easily carry on with their project related
activities. Core developers appear as organization members on the HyperSpy
[GitHub organization](https://github.com/orgs/hyperspy/people) and are on our
[@hyperspy/developers](https://github.com/orgs/hyperspy/teams/developers) GitHub

> team. Core developers are expected to review code contributions while adhering to the

Author: It seems that https://github.com/orgs/hyperspy/teams/developers is _not_ visible when not logged into GitHub and even this was case, it could be misleading. Maybe we should remove if for now and simply say that different library of the HyperSpy organisation can have their own core-developer team.

Reviewer 2: Since we are clarifying the governance, I think that it is good that we publicly display the members of each category. Since the current Gihub's developer's is not public, maybe we could add this information to the website?

> say that different library of the HyperSpy organisation can have their own core-developer team.

That's an important discussion that we must have. Currently all developers have rights to all repositories in the hyperspy organization. This means that, by accepting a project into the organization, we all take responsibility of it, and it is governed under the same rules that we are formalizing here. I think that this is a good thing for the projects' long-term survival.

Author: We will need a page listing the various team and update this paragraph accordingly.

> [core developer guide](CORE_DEV_GUIDE.md). New core developers can be nominated

Reviewer: I don't know if this actually exists?

Author: Remove for now and add it later if needed.

by any existing core developer, and for details on that process see our core
developer guide.

Core developers that have not contributed to the project (commits or GitHub comments)

> in the past 12 months will be asked if they want to become emeritus core developers

Reviewer 3: Do we really want to check that so frequently, maybe 24 months?

> and recant their commit until they become active again.
> The list of core developers, active and emeritus is public.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
and recant their commit rights until they become active again.
The list of core developers, active and emeritus, is public.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Ancillary Core developers

Ancillary Core Developers are trusted community members with write access to the extension projects:

  - Rosettasciio
  - eXSpy
  - pyxem
  - kikuchipy
  - lumispy
  - atomap
  - holospy
  - particleSpy
  - ETSpy
  
These members can comment on and review pull requests but aren't required to have write acess to the main HyperSpy repository.  Disagreement to a pull request by an Ancillary Core Developer should be given the same weight as by a Core Developer.

Ancillary Core Developers can serve on the Steering Council even without contributions to the main HyperSpy repository. 
```

Author: Should the list of extension be listed somewhere else in order to avoid to update the governance when an extension is added?

Reviewer 2: I think that this policy can introduce loopholes in our governance. Indeed, in my mind, people with decisional power in the community must be people that we ourselves trust. Implementing the concept of "ancillary core developers" with powers such as "Disagreement to a pull request by an Ancillary Core Developer should be given the same weight as by a Core Developer", means that we are giving decisional power to people that we may not even know, which breaks the principle of direct trust on which our governance model is based.

Also, this concept requires listing specific packages, what  may feel unfair to similar package's developers that are not listed here.

In summary, I suggest not adding this category of developers to protect HyperSpy from difficult to foresee issues.  What do we lose by no implementing this? I think that it is highly unlikely that a developer of a package that relies on HyperSpy doesn't get involved in the core HyperSpy package by, at the very least, opening issues and participating in the discussions. If somebody doesn't display this minimum level of interest in the HyperSpy community, I don't see how we can give him powers or elect him as a member Steering Council. If he does, then he'll be a core developer, so there is no need for this extra category. In other words, we don't lose much, if anything at all, by not adding the "ancillary core developers" category.

I think that the spirt of this idea is to acknowledge the fact that the core-developers of packages that rely on HyperSpy have an overall impact in the community that is bigger than what their contributions to the main project may suggest. I think that this is fair enough, and it is a point that the Steering Council will certainly take into account when making decisions towards nominations to the core-developers team and the Steering Council itself.

> ## BDFL

Reviewer: Move this section below the Steering Council for clearity

> The Project’s Benevolent dictator for life (BDFL) is Francisco De La Peña.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The Project’s Benevolent dictator for life (BDFL) is Francisco de la Peña.
```

> The Project’s Benevolent dictator for life (BDFL) is Francisco de La Peña.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Project’s Benevolent dictator for life (BDFL) is Francisco de la Peña.
```

The BDFL has the authority to make all final decisions for The Project. In practice
the BDFL chooses to defer that authority to the consensus of the Steering Council
(see below). It is expected that the BDFL will only rarely assert his final authority.
Because rarely used, we refer to BDFL’s final authority as a “special” or “overriding” vote. When it does occur, the BDFL override typically happens in situations where there is a deadlock in the Steering Council (see below) or if the Steering Council asks the BDFL to make a decision on a specific matter.

## Steering Council

The Project will have a Steering Council that consists of Project Contributors
who have produced contributions that are substantial in quality and quantity,
and sustained over at least one year. The overall role of the Council is to ensure,

> with input from the Community the long-term well-being of the project, both technically and as a community.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
with input from the Community, the long-term well-being of the project, both technically and as a community.
```

During the everyday project activities, council members participate in all
discussions, code review and other project activities as peers with all other
Contributors and the Community. In these everyday activities, Council Members do
not have any special power or privilege through their membership on the Council.
However, it is expected that because of the quality and quantity of their contributions
and their expert knowledge of the Project Software and Services that Council Members
will provide useful guidance, both technical and in terms of project direction,

> to potentially less experienced contributors.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

There may be contributors and core-developers who are actually more knowledgeable that members of the SC, so I suggest to delete this, since the main role of the SC is to participate in strategic decision making, which does not necessarily require the same kind of skills as contributing code.

The Steering Council and its Members play a special role in certain situations.
In particular, the Council may:

- Make decisions about the overall scope, vision and direction of the project.
- Make decisions about strategic collaborations with other organizations or individuals.
- Make decisions about specific technical issues, features, bugs and pull requests.

>   They are the primary mechanism of guiding the code review process and merging pull requests.

Reviewer 2: Do we need this? It feels too fine-grained for the SC. If the SC has to intervene on technical issues, it'll be because the community does not manage to agree on them, and therefore it falls under the scope the the following bullet point.

> - Make decisions when regular community discussion doesn’t produce consensus on

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Make decisions when a regular community discussion does not produce consensus on
```

  an issue in a reasonable time frame.

The chair of the Steering Council is elected by the Steering Council and voted every year. The chair may delegate their authority on a particular decision or set of decisions to any other Council member at their discretion. The chair is responsible for ensuring that all Steering Council activities that require a vote are properly documented.

### Council membership

> The Steering Council is currently fixed in size [to be defined] members. This number may increase in the future. The initial Steering Council (in alphabetical order) consists of [to be determined].

Author: ```suggestion
The Steering Council is not fixed in size and the current Steering Council (in alphabetical order) consists of [to be determined].
```

To become eligible for being a Steering Council Member an individual must be a
Project Contributor who has produced contributions that are substantial in quality

> and quantity, and sustained over at least one year. Potential Council Members are

Reviewer 3: duplication from above (lines 92-94)

> and quantity, and sustained over at least one year. Potential Council Members are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Project Contributor who has produced contributions that are substantial in quality
and quantity, and sustained over at least one year to either HyperSpy or an extension project. Potential Council Members are
```

> nominated by existing Council members and voted upon by the existing Council.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
nominated by an existing Council member, Core Developer or Ancilliary Core Developer and voted upon by the Core Developers and the Ancilliary Core Developers.  Votes should be sent to the BDFL within a 3 week time from the nomination.
```

When considering potential Members, the Council will look at candidates with a
comprehensive view of their contributions. This will include but is not limited
to code, code review, infrastructure work, chat participation, community

> help/building, education and outreach, design work, etc. We are deliberately

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
help/building, education and outreach, contributions to other projects of the HyperSpy ecosystem, design work, etc. We are deliberately
```

not setting arbitrary quantitative metrics (like “100 commits in this repo”) to
avoid encouraging behavior that plays to the metrics rather than the project’s
overall well-being. We want to encourage a diverse array of backgrounds, viewpoints
and talents in our team, which is why we explicitly do not define code as the
sole metric on which council membership will be evaluated.

If a Council member becomes inactive in the project for a period of one year,

> they will be considered for removal from the Council. Before removal, inactive

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
they will be considered for removal from the Council. Before removal, the inactive
```

> Member will be approached by the BDFL to see if they plan

Author: ```suggestion
Member will be approached by the chair to see if they plan
```

on returning to active participation. If not, they will be removed immediately
upon a Council vote. If they plan on returning to active participation soon,
they will be given a grace period of one year. If they don’t return to active
participation within that time period they will be removed by vote of the Council
without further grace period. All former Council members can be considered for
membership again at any time in the future, like any other Project Contributor.
Retired Council members will be listed on the project website, acknowledging the
period during which they were active in the Council.

The Council reserves the right to eject current Members, other than the BDFL,
if they are deemed to be actively harmful to the project’s well-being, and
attempts at communication and conflict resolution have failed.

The HyperSpy steering council may be contacted at `EMAIL ADDRESS` or via the
[@hyperspy/steering-council](https://github.com/orgs/hyperspy/teams/steering-council) GitHub team.

## Conflict of interest

It is expected that the SC Members will be employed at a wide range of companies,
universities and non-profit organizations. Because of this, it is possible that

> Members will have conflict of interests. Such conflict of interests include,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Members will have conflicts of interests. Such conflicts of interests include,
```

but are not limited to:

- Financial interests, such as investments, employment, or contracting work,
  outside of The Project that may influence their work on The Project.
- Access to proprietary information of their employer that could potentially
  leak into their work with the Project.
- An issue where the person privately gains an advantage from The Project resources,
  but The Project has no gain or suffers a disadvantage.
  

> All members of the Steering Council, shall disclose to the rest of the Council

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
All members of the Steering Council shall disclose to the rest of the Council
```

any conflict of interest they may have. Members with a conflict of interest in
a particular issue may participate in Council discussions on that issue,
but must recuse themselves from voting on the issue. If the Project Lead has recused

> themself for a particular decision, they will appoint a substitute BDFL for that decision.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
themselves for a particular decision, they will appoint a substitute BDFL for that decision.
```

# Decision Making Process

Decisions about the future of the project are made through discussion with all

> members of the community. All non-sensitive project management discussion takes

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
members of the community. All non-sensitive project management discussions take
```

place on the [issue tracker](https://github.com/hyperspy/hyperspy/issues). Occasionally,

> sensitive discussion may occur on a private communication channel.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
sensitive discussions may occur on a private communication channel.
```

> Decisions should be made in accordance with the [mission and values](MISSION_AND_VALUES.md)

Reviewer 3: Do you plan to add this document?

Author: Yes, I do! 😃

of the HyperSpy project.

> The HyperSpy uses a “consensus seeking” process for making decisions. The group

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The HyperSpy project uses a “consensus seeking” process for making decisions. The group
```

tries to find a resolution that has no open objections among core developers.
Core developers are expected to distinguish between fundamental objections to a
proposal and minor perceived flaws that they can live with, and not hold up the
decision-making process for the latter.  If no option can be found without
objections, the decision is escalated to the SC, which will itself use
consensus seeking to come to a resolution. In the unlikely event that there is
still a deadlock, the proposal will move forward if it has the support of a
simple majority of the SC.

Decisions (in addition to adding core developers and SC membership as above)
are made according to the following rules:

> - **Minor documentation changes**, such as typo fixes, or addition / correction of a

Reviewer 3: Not notably relaxed compared with major documentation changes. Except that "reasonable time" might be shorter here.

  sentence, require approval by a core developer *and* no disagreement or requested
  changes by a core developer on the issue or pull request page (lazy
  consensus). Core developers are expected to give “reasonable time” to others
  to give their opinion on the pull request if they’re not confident others
  would agree.

- **Code changes and major documentation changes** require agreement by *one*
  core developer *and* no disagreement or requested changes by a core developer
  on the issue or pull-request page (lazy consensus). For all changes of this type,
  core developers are expected to give “reasonable time” after approval and before
  merging for others to weigh in on the pull request in its final state.

> - **Changes to the API principles** require a dedicated issue on our

Reviewer 2: What are "API principles"?

  [issue tracker](https://github.com/hyperspy/hyperspy/issues) and follow the
  decision-making process outlined above.

- **Changes to this governance model or our mission, vision, and values**
  require a dedicated issue on our [issue tracker](https://github.com/hyperspy/hyperspy/issues)
  and follow the decision-making process outlined above,
  *unless* there is unanimous agreement from core developers on the change in

>   which case it can move forward faster.

Reviewer 2: I think that changes to the governance and mission documents are too sensitive to be treated as standard code. The raison d'être of the SC is to make strategic decisions, and there is nothing more strategic for the project than its governance and mission documents. Therefore, I think that, while changes to the governance can be suggested by anybody and the discussion should be public, any changes to the governance should be approved by the SC.

If an objection is raised on a lazy consensus, the proposer can appeal to the
community and core developers and the change can be approved or rejected by
escalating to the SC.

# Acknowledgements

> This document is adapted from the [Jupyter Project governance](https://jupyter.org/governance/governance.html).

Author: This is not correct anymore because jupyter has changed their governance significantly.
This is actually closer to scikit-image: https://scikit-image.org/docs/stable/skips/1-governance.html
